Well, it's a great pleasure, as I said.
I guess with all the changes that have taken place in your country, which we don't have to go into in detail, of course, but I wonder what kind of, how does that affect you as a novelist, as a writer of such great stature?
Well, as a writer, it doesn't really
affect me in terms of my work, you know, because it wasn't apartheid that made me a writer and it isn't the end of apartheid that's going to stop me.
It makes a big difference in my life as a human being, as a citizen.
Tremendous changes and of course great joy that it happened in my lifetime.
I sometimes began to think that I would never see
freedom I never see democracy begun in my country.
Well, I use that question actually as a way to enter a conversation, actually, and I understand that completely, of course.
But as a writer whose work is influenced by political events and whose writing, indeed, sparked the world's consciousness about situations, what kind of
responsibility does that put on you now, with the understanding that your work is so influential and it is charged by this?
You see, I don't think about my work as influential at all.
To me, I'm simply trying to understand life while we are here, how we cope with the business of being alive, what our relationships are like.
So that the fact that my books were so quote-unquote political was because I was living in, born into, and lived my life in this society that was so much shaped by conflict, by political conflict, which of course in practical terms is human conflict.
Now there's the very different kind of atmosphere at home.
And that is this extraordinary determination to reconstruct, to make a normal life for people out of what was abnormal.
Really people have to begin to learn how to live in a new way.
It's a tremendous kind of challenge.
already in the last three years, because it didn't, the changes didn't begin only after the election on the 27th of April.
They were beginning before then.
And I could see so many new things that people were facing.
It doesn't mean to say that the kind of dangers that were there before or gone, that that's the end of everything.
People have conflicts in their lives.
They have ambitions to follow both in politics and outside politics.
There is, for instance, a very interesting situation between the people who were in exile and who come back and who have certain expectations that perhaps are not met or are met beyond their wildest dreams.
This is something that I find very interesting.
Then there's the completely new fact that now black and white people are going to live
are already beginning to live together in the sense that there's no more segregation in living conditions and so on.
So black people can move in where they like.
They have exactly the same rights.
We all have the same rights now.
We are South Africans for the first time.
Of course, the experience in this country is, while you certainly now have the right to do certain things, whether or not it comes to pass as a practical matter, that takes generations, doesn't it?
I mean, you can't force white people to all of a sudden consider black people to be their brothers and sisters, I mean, in terms of attitudes.
You see, the situation is very different from the one in America.
Here you have a white majority and a black minority.
You have black people who came here like everybody else.
They have lost their language.
Many of them don't know where they came from.
They have lost everything except the black skin that makes you African.
They are Americans.
Afro-Americans.
I understand that perfectly because they find it difficult to be respected for what they are.
There's nothing wrong with the term blacks.
It's a perfectly honourable way to talk with people.
Some people are black, some people are white, some people are blonde, some people are dark haired.
This is just the way that we are made.
At home in South Africa it's really very different because first of all the blacks are vastly in the majority.
Vastly.
The whites are the minority.
The whites are the people who have to make this
adaptation.
And they are the ones who came.
And they are the ones who came, exactly.
The others were there, are there.
And despite the years of colonialism and then of apartheid repression, people retain something that I think is terribly important, and I know that from my life at home.
They've retained their languages.
They've retained their customs.
I'm not talking about tribalism.
I'm talking the way that different people, Italians, Jews, Christians, Muslims, celebrate the occasions of life, births, marriages, deaths, and so on.
So it's not a melting pot, as the phrase is used in this country.
No, no.
I'm sorry for interrupting, but what you're saying is that they have retained their culture.
The great majority of people are at home in their own culture.
If you don't mind if I jump around a little bit, too, because I do make sense out of it when I transcribe the tape.
Winning the Nobel Prize, what kind of added responsibility?
Do you feel this now when you write that perhaps millions of more people are now watching and now saying, this is one of the great living writers?
Do you feel this sense that I really have to produce?
No, not at all.
And I think I was very fortunate in that the book that I've just published, the novel I've just published, I had begun in 1990, a whole year before I got that prize, because many people tell me that there's a great crisis if you start a new work after you've got this prize.
I was fortunately not in that position.
I was already deep in my novel.
What kind of a crisis, just out of curiosity?
Well, the very one you described, that they feel that everybody's waiting to see what they're going to produce next and waiting to say, ah, well, you see, now this book is really a great disappointment from a Nobel Prize winner.
On the other hand, there are people certainly, and I say this as a great compliment, I mean, you do not sell in the same, your books do not
sell as many book copies as the commercial best-selling types.
Far from it.
Pardon me.
But now, with this exposure, I suspect that a lot of people who hadn't read you before or even perhaps hadn't heard of you before might now be likely to pick up one of your books and come to you for the first time.
It varies from country to country.
It's interesting.
In England, for example, the Nobel Prize means very little.
As far as they're concerned, the Booker Prize is just as important, but it's their own prize just for their own people or for Commonwealth, so I don't know how they can compare it with the World Prize.
The fact is the Nobel Prize has made no difference in Britain to the sales of my books at all.
Really?
It's been very different in America, in Canada, in Germany, and of course there are always new translations that come once you've got the Nobel Prize.
But I don't think it makes such an enormous difference.
It depends, too, on what kind of writer you are.
I'm sure when Saul Bellow, for instance, got the Nobel Prize, probably there was a tremendous rise in his sales.
I would think Tony Morrison as well.
And Tony Morrison, now.
When you think of a wonderful writer like the Egyptian, Nagib Mahfouz, about whom, indeed, I've
to whom I devote one of the Norton lectures that I'm giving.
Even among people I know who are extremely well-read, they have not read Mapuj.
I haven't.
There, you are.
You're a great reader.
It's a confession.
Yes, but it's not uncommon, I assure you.
So the fact that in 1988, I think, he got the Nobel Prize, I don't think it made much difference in his life.
I'm absolutely delighted that he's got the Nobel Prize because I'm a great admirer of the only three books that have translated into English that I've been able to read.
And he's not known at all, really.
But now, of course, publishers, I suppose, will begin to bring out translation of these books.
I'm not meaning to suggest, certainly expectation is there, but to go back, you said that this book was in progress when you received the award.
And you say that it affected none of the creative process.
But then again, the changes, these tremendously dramatic changes that were taking place in your country were in progress as well.
And they were certainly influencing the writing of this book.
But you see, that's been the case with every book that I've written.
Because in South Africa, there has been, over my writing years,
one extraordinary crisis after another.
But this of course was the resolving one, you're quite right.
This was the joyous one that had some anxious moments.
But in other words, I was used to, I've been used to all my life working in a completely volatile atmosphere.
Tell me, again, we're hopping around if that's okay, but tell me a little bit about these Norton lectures that you're giving here.
Are they all on the subject of literature?
Well, I've given myself rather free reign.
I've taken as the overall title what was indeed the title of my Nobel literature, which was Writing and Being, a relationship between the two.
And the first one, which I gave last week,
called Adam's Rib, and it was about how writers form characters and the misconceptions that people have about this.
And the one that I'm giving today is called Hanging on a Sunrise, which is a quotation from a poem written by a friend of mine, a black
poet and a revolutionary.
And it's about revolutionary writing.
I found it interesting that in many countries, people who go through great experiences are unable then to write about them.
I mean, they're not writers.
And I think Camus remarked on this after the war, because in the resistance,
He had known so many people who had had extraordinary experiences and he hoped that some remarkable literature would come out of this.
It didn't.
In South Africa there is suddenly quite a number of books being written by people who were the makers of our revolution and whose experiences we
Most of us who were either in a different part of the movement or on the fringe of the movement didn't know about because necessarily much of their actions had to be secret.
There were people who were involved in underground work in the country and going back and forth, coming in and out into the skies, all very extraordinary.
So I've chosen two books written by such people.
The one written by a man called Ronnie Casseroles, who came from a poor... How do we spell?
Ronnie is the usual, N-N-I-E, and then it's K-A-S-R-I-L-S, Casseroles.
Okay, fine, thank you.
And he was born into a working class Jewish immigrant family.
and was rather clever at school but didn't seem to have much opportunity to go to university, worked in a factory, became interested in the trade union movement, got some sort of scholarship to study, retained his interest in trade unions, and from that went into the, what is that, that's the school of London.
Oh, it's just that they're seasoned.
Yeah, they probably saw a tale.
joined the African National Congress underground, because it was already banned by then, and was one of a very few white men who actually were in the guerrilla army, in Mkwonto Wissizwe, the sphere of the nation, fighting outside the country, on the borders of the country, and organizing the underground.
And he had a big position, a commanding position,
in that army.
So there were very, very few white men who lived like that.
He also came in and out the country in disguise and was known to the newspapers as the Red Pimpernel because he was a communist.
And he's a very flamboyant figure and I think he enjoyed having this thing called the Red Pimpernel.
His book is called Armed and Dangerous because that was also what he was said to be.
So he's written
a very lively book about his experiences sharing all sorts of things that we really didn't know.
We suddenly discovered that around the corner from where he lived he and some other people were busy making bonds to sabotage and electrical stations and so on.
So his background is Jewish
communist, humanist, no religion at all.
The other man, Carl Niehaus, is a young Afrikaner from a small village born into a sort of fundamentalist Christian family, Dutch Reformed Church.
And in his book, which he calls Fighting for Hope,
Carl with a K or a C?
Carl with a C, and Niehaus the German way, N-I-E.
H-A-U-S, Niehaus.
He somehow struggled out of this, it's fascinating, out of this background.
And he too became a member of the ANC, went into the underground, and instead of going into exile and coming in and out like a casserole, he got caught, was portrayed by somebody, he got 15 years.
of which he served seven, and then came the change and amnesty.
Now, when we're talking about books, we're talking about fiction.
Sir, if I can just finish this, my interest is the contrast.
The two people, and he's still a devout Christian.
I know him well.
His whole move toward being a revolution, he was from a Christian base.
So you have these two people arriving at the same point from a completely different background.
So I deal with them, and then also with two
two poets who were imprisoned underneath.
And how many lectures are there in the series?
That's two.
Then I've got three on different writers.
One on... So it's quite, it's a whole series?
Six.
Oh, it's six.
Wow.
One is Mahfouz, Nagit Mahfouz.
The next one is Chinua Achebe.
And the third one is Amos Oz.
Yes, it's wonderful, especially the female.
This last book was great.
And then the sixth one is more or less...
about my consciousness as a colonial.
The colonial consciousness, how you come out of that to something different.
That's the concluding lecture?
That must, I imagine, that's... Are these all prepared?
You've done... Oh, yes.
I'm not someone who can add live.
So you have a script, so to speak, and these are graduate students that attend these?
No, this is a public lecture.
I think I will attempt to...
It's held tonight, it's in the Saunders Theatre, and then later, the next one, the next two, I think, are in the lower.
And Cambridge is so wonderful.
I'm sure they're out on the streets.
I mean, I've been to lectures here.
There was one earlier this year for Elizabeth Bishop.
Robert Giroux came up to, did you read her letters, by the way?
Giroux's writing a book.
Wonderful.
Only in Cambridge, I think, would you find people mobbed to hear about the letters of a deceased poet.
Well, last week it was absolutely full.
And I'm sure it will be throughout.
When we're talking about books, of course, we are talking about fiction, right?
And the power of fiction.
Perhaps we could talk about that.
I mean, in this country, we have...
I wonder what the concept of fiction is, what your concept of, does it have a purpose beyond, I mean, certainly it must engage and entertain us, I guess, on a certain level, but it has to do with something else, doesn't it, I think, in your view?
I don't know.
I think, I don't think that literature should be determinedly tendentious.
I think it fails then, and then it becomes attractive.
I think that what is tendentious in it should come out of the characters, the place, the time.
The main thing to me about literature is that it should be in some way illuminating, that it should
I expected to tell me something about how people feel and to explain something of the mystery of life to me.
So that there are all kinds of fiction that fit into this.
I see fiction very broadly.
And I don't think that fiction necessarily has a direct purpose other than this.
Really?
When you spoke earlier about a body of fiction coming out of great historical events, you're talking about this merely as the, not merely, but as the material to write according to the way you just described, not as a historical kind of a work to speak for itself.
You see, I think that the history comes there of itself.
If you sit down and write a novel about Cambridge today and what's happening here politically and what's happening perhaps in the... I see big changes in this university.
You don't have to talk about laws.
You don't have to be didactic in any way.
The very way that your characters live and speak will be framed by this.
and will be influenced by the past year.
So the novelist's mandate... It will indeed be a kind of history from within of the years, the early years of the 90s in Cambridge.
I heard a wonderful quotation recently and somebody once asked Nouveau Clapp who, what kind of reader he visualizes and he said,
I look out there and I see a hundred Nabokovs, I guess.
Mainly, I guess he was writing to please himself.
I wonder, do you have a reader?
Is there a reader in mind?
No, I don't think it's fatal.
It's actually fatal.
And sometimes, only in my very first book, because it's the only book of mine that is autobiographical.
My books are all very different, and I'm certainly not there, but in my first book, I have most writers.
And there I was thinking, well, you know, what will my mother think and what kind of effect in the little town where I was born, where I no longer live, what will they think about this?
But since then... Did those concerns, in your view, weaken the book?
I think so, yes.
I think they did.
Because you were concerned about what the leader might— Especially if they thought it was a romanocle and trying to match the names to the characters.
Do you know where it comes from?
I mean, what lights the spark then?
You were a year into this book when the Nobel Prize was awarded.
Did you decide, I guess I'm driving at the genesis of the story, the spark, do you have it pretty much figured out before you start writing it or does it develop, is it a journey for you of discovery?
It develops as it goes along.
It's very difficult for me to say because it's such a subconscious process and it's even difficult to say when you started thinking about it.
For instance, I found when I was looking for something else,
a note of this title in 1989.
So if I wrote down those two lines then, there was something, the theme of this book was somehow beginning.
And isn't that interesting because you start the novel with a, there's an echo, it's a photograph, an old card that she turns over and
Oh, I'm sure she remembers that, but it's almost the same kind of thing, isn't it, where you speak memory, so to speak, and it pops back.
I'm sorry if you're jumping all around here.
Let me just take a second.
You mentioned when we came in that your education is from books.
And I had read the Paris Review interview with you, which was 1980, which I thought was a wonderful interview, that I guess your formal education is really basically non-existent.
No, basically non-existent.
I surely must be the most poorly educated Nobel Prize winner ever.
That's a wonderful quote.
Well then tell me a bit about the education of Nadine Gordemur then.
Well, I went to a convent school.
in the small town where I live.
I went to the University of Witwatersrand for one year, but no degree.
So my education, as I say, really comes from the local public library.
And was it serendipitous?
Was it eclectic?
It began by being serendipitous because I have to say to my mother that she first of all read
to me a lot when I was small.
And then at the age of six, I could be myself, had a passion for books.
She made me a member of the children's section of the public library.
But in that small town, we leave a librarian and soon Nadine wandered off into the other shell.
And I just read whatever took my fancy and had no idea of the incongruity.
so that I would be reading at the age of 11 or something.
I'd still be reading Dr. Doolittle.
Passion of Dr. Doolittle.
But I was also reading Pepys' Diary.
I was dipping into facilities.
For me, this was all just, I was like a little pig encrover.
I love Pepys' Diary.
I went to visit Pepys' Library at Cambridge, by the way.
Did you?
It's in my book.
My book is about the passion for books over 25 centuries back in Alexandria, and just bring it forward.
I was so disappointed when I went to Egypt last year.
I've been to Egypt before, but I've never been to Alexandria.
And of course, there's no feeling, you know, of Forza's wonderful little book and all the things I've read about the oral library at the beginning of time.
They say that there is something down there.
You know, Pergamum now is the rival library to Alexandria, and there is a shell of the library there.
Oh, really?
The passion for books, it's amazing.
And so, was it largely fiction that you read, or everything?
I think it was largely fiction at the beginning, but I think I read quite a lot of travel books because I've never been anywhere.
And I seem to be living...
you know, down at the big toe of the world, miles from the real world.
And at what point did you say, I can do this?
Or was it more of a force saying, I have to do this, I wonder?
No.
My passion as a small child, when I was about 10, was to be a dancer.
I was absolutely determined to be a dancer.
And I think I was a great show-off, because I was also...
and I would mimic my mother's tea party friends after they'd gone and so on.
So there was sort of something going on there and they had to find its right outlet.
But I started writing at the age of about 9, 10, 11.
And I published my first adult story when I was 15.
Wow.
Published?
Yes, in a journal in South Africa.
Tremendous.
I should think so.
No.
And I think I was lucky in that nobody took any particular notice of this.
My parents didn't get all excited and proud of me.
It was just Nadine amusing herself.
It was not regarded as anything that could possibly lead to life's work.
Because in that little town, what did girls do?
Between growing up and getting married, they worked in a shop.
became a typist or they became a music teacher or a dancing teacher or a school teacher and that was it.
There was nothing else.
So that if you didn't fit into those categories to fill in the time between growing up and getting married then you were an oddity.
But from the age of 15 however you continued, you were emboldened to... I was just writing
and writing and writing, you know.
And at some point... I began to be published in little magazines here and there.
And then through that, I got to know other people who wrote.
And by the time that I went to spend that year, I think I was really twenty, at university, then of course my life opened out.
I met other writers.
I met then
young black journalists and aspirin writers like myself, one of whom is now still, we're still friends.
And so along with what interested me, the racial barriers broke down because I had more in common with young blacks who were writing than I had with my contemporaries back in the small town.
If you don't mind my asking a stylistic question without getting into the novel itself, I find it very interesting that you use the dashes and you disdain direct quotes.
Why is that?
I dropped using quotes some years ago because it's a purely visual thing for me.
They seem to me to isolate what people say.
And as you and I are talking now, it's very much a to and fro.
I would see the space between us more or less as a dash between what you say and what I say.
So I started to do that.
And I have to say, I don't notice it.
I mean, after four or five pages, it's... Oh, well, that's good.
I don't notice the absence of the quotations.
No, no.
I really am with the characters.
With the characters.
And I think it really is more incumbent upon you now to really delineate the characterizations of the characters
I mean, they have to be stronger, and I think more recognizable.
Of course, that's one of the... Well, another thing that I started years ago, and that I try to stick to, you may notice I never write He Said, She thing.
But I know that, yeah.
It's part of it.
And I feel it's up to the writer.
That's what I was just saying.
Get the tone of voice so that you know who is speaking.
Precisely.
And as I was reading this book, I'm saying, you know, she's not saying, she said,
he said, but I know who's speaking.
Well, that's what I try for, so I hope it works.
And the voices, of course, capturing that voice.
Do these voices come to you?
Can you hear them?
Yes.
You can hear them.
And it's interesting you say voice, because people say, when you write a novel, how do you know whether it's going to be in the first person or the third person, whether it's going to change tenses?
The answer is that until I hear it,
until it's as if it's been told to me, that's where I'm going to be able to write it.
Otherwise, I haven't found the way to write it.
And do you write in longhand, or do you type?
I type.
I type on a little old Hermes baby.
I haven't gone over to the word process.
I find that I'm a nonfiction writer, that they're essential.
Oh, I'm sure.
And I've got an electronic
typewriter for writing letters and so on.
And maybe I'll get a word processor for that because it's very useful.
Yeah, but I think for writing creatively the way, artistically the way that you do.
But for me it's plugging in facts and moving things around.
But you see, for me, if I have crossed something out and put something else in, a word above, and then cross it out again,
I don't want to lose it.
I want it all there, and to have to print it out each time would be told.
Have you retained all of the variant drafts of your works over the years?
I didn't at the beginning, but I do now.
But I never had more than for a novel.
I would have just the one, the original, and being a clean version.
that I'd go through and make small corrections, but you couldn't really call it a rewrite.
Virtually the first is the end.
I hesitate to use the phrase writer's block, but are you burdened at all, or do you find obstacles in the path, or do you pretty much always know where you're going?
I mean, I know it's not effortless, nothing like that.
No, no, no.
With a novel, I know where I'm going, and I could stop usually one day
virtually with a half sentence or a sentence.
Really?
But it must be the right sentence that I stop at and go back the next day.
I might, and I very often do that when I get deep in the novel, just before I go to bed at night, as if I were reading somebody else's letters, I would steal into the room where I work and I would read over what I've written during the day and I would see things that are not good and I would change, make little changes then.
But Jim, generally when you start the following day, you resume precisely where you left off.
Yes.
Well, that's amazing.
If it doesn't look right, then I might go back and look at the end of the last chapter and see, you know.
And I never do.
I know some writers, I'm amazed that they will write a chapter that's got to come much further on in the book.
and it'll be there, and then when they come to it they'll snap it in.
I couldn't do that.
You have to have page two finished before you go to page three, and so on.
I'm sure you might have noticed in my books, there are what I call sort of invisible stitches.
There are little hints here and there.
For instance, the photograph at the beginning that Vera turns over, the postcard.
Then there's an echo of that which just came.
I like it when that happens.
When the son writes a letter and says he's enclosing a picture of the woman that he's leaving his wife for, but there is no picture.
So there's a kind of picture on the duplicity of... Well, she's circling.
That's amazing.
I mean, you talk about being totally honest, as she was, and he still didn't get the picture.
I mean, get the message, get the picture, and he kept it.
I also read that you once toyed with the idea of being a journalist.
Well, when I was still living in that small town, I was writing, but I was, so to speak, as I was living on my father.
In other words, he was feeding me, wasn't earning anything.
And so I worked for about three months for the local newspaper.
My career there was not illustrious at all.
It's amazing.
I did an interview with Tobias Wolfe a couple weeks ago for Publishers Weekly.
I'm doing interviews now for Publishers Weekly as well.
And he was a reporter after Vietnam for about six months, and he said I was the world's worst reporter.
He said he just doesn't see the two crafts as being even remotely... Well, I don't think they are, but on the other hand, look at Graham Greene.
Well, Graham Greene, but there's a great exception, I think.
Yes, but you know...
And there are... There are others.
Hemingway, yes.
Hemingway had a career as a journalist.
Hemingway, hmm.
Stephen Crane, who wrote some wonderful... Yes, he did.
...journalism.
So, in fact, Virginia Woolf did a lot of reviews.
Virginia Woolf was quite a professional writer.
She was a woman of letters, actually, in the classic sense.
I mean, she did all the different forms.
Now, you've got a substantial body of work, and...
And you've written short stories as well.
Nine volumes, nine collections.
Quite a few, right.
And so how does one decide this is a story and this is the material for a novel?
Well, you know, a story is like an egg.
It comes to me sort of complete.
So that I know where I'm going to begin, I know exactly where I'm going to end.
It's all there.
Whereas a novel is much more spread out, so to speak.
So that in a novel, in my mind, I will know where I'm going to begin and there will be certain key points that I'm going to have to reach.
But how I'm going to get there and what will happen on the way, I don't know.
And it changes as I write it.
And of course a novel, it's one of the very few exercises professionally
where you start something knowing full well that nobody's going to have anything to say about it for two or three or four years.
And whether or not it succeeds, of course, that's another story, too.
A friend of mine who is a musician and also a writer, a jazz musician, he said, you know, the thing about jazz, or any kind of... I said, you get your applause immediately.
I mean, you know, if you're good and you're communicating, and I suppose as a stage actor as well,
the response is immediate, but you don't get that as a writer.
And then there's this period of anxiety.
Do you have any postpartum anxiety when a book is completed?
No, when the book is completed, there always must be something else you're going to do.
Otherwise, you know,
You have been with it for so long that you're just going to fall into some kind of depression.
This is very common with writers.
So there must be something waiting that you can wind down with.
That's where I would be writing a story very likely.
In this case, it's unusual this year because this year I knew that when I finished that novel
toward the end of last year, that in January I had to start reading for and writing these lectures.
But I feel I haven't worked now the whole of this year because I haven't written anything in Manchester.
Really?
So you spent the whole year really preparing these lectures?
Yes, and then of course there was a big and joyful interruption of the elections and all the things that happened at home.
And that must have been quite, can you just give me a comment on that?
It's apart from the writing, but to have lived with that moment of your life.
It really was wonderful.
I'm a member of the African National Congress, and I belong to a local branch.
And our branch, like every other branch in every other political organization,
asked for people to be so-called agents who would be on duty in a polling station to see that people who were semi-literate were not persuaded by others to put their eggs wherever.
So that I had a remarkable day, day and a half, in a polling station seeing the different people coming in.
It was in a church
quite near where I live in a white suburb, now with a few black people living there, for many many years only a white suburb.
And to see people who were domestic servants, middle class white people, businessmen coming in for work, well dressed women,
cleaners, black cleaners from the university which is down the road, a complete mixture of every stage in society because this was not an election where it was proportional representation, so you could vote anywhere.
Indeed, some people went, some white people went to Soweto to vote.
But to see this real mixture of South Africans who before had been so divided by
the lack of rights for some and the largesse of rights for the others and the kind of awe, the solemnity with which many black people came in to perform what to everybody else in the rest of the world is really, you know, something that they don't even bother to go about half the day.
I mean, a good turnout here is, you know, a great turnout is 50%.
I mean, we're having a primary election in about two weeks.
I'll be amazed.
Well, the Kennedy race will bring out a lot of people.
A lot of people.
That's amazing that they would even consider putting this guy out.
It's an amazement to me.
If we lose him in the Senate, we should be ashamed of ourselves.
You mean if this Chuck Romney gets him?
Yes, it's dead even.
I mean, he has a very good chance of
And such a dirty campaign, actually, on TV.
It's really terrible.
Well, that's beside the point.
He's a kid, and he's attacking the man's record, and the man's record on social issues is spectacular.
And he does so much for the state.
And he's very good on foreign policy, too.
He's been a wonderful friend to us.
My wife's a clinical social worker, and she has helped people.
And I mean, if you have a problem with
a client who's having trouble getting into a nursing home.
This one person is, you call his office and they respond immediately.
I mean, she said, I cannot tell you how many times if we've had a problem, we call Senator Kennedy's office and they take care of it.
And she said, my wife deals, she's outraged.
She said, if we lose that man, she's going to be very, very upset.
I don't mean to go off onto that tangent, but talking about, again,
What, for you, is more satisfying creatively?
I mean, obviously the novel, but do you use stories as a tune-up, or as a change of pace, or is it just responding to different creative stimuli, I wonder?
It's difficult to say.
I love reading short stories, and I love writing, because, you know, there's a great satisfaction in... But are they confections, then, when you say that?
Are they confections for you, or are they actually... No, no, they are.
You know, they're serious work.
And of course they're very tight.
They're very convinced that the challenge, I mean, in a novel, you know, you've got space.
But it's difficult, really.
I find... I just want to make sure you've done this.
I find, alas, that whereas I used to have so many
ideas for stories.
When I finished a novel I'd have three or four lined up that speak.
So now as I've got older I seem to have less ideas for short stories, fewer ideas for short stories.
And I move more and more towards novels, to the complexities of novels.
At the moment now
since I finished that and while I was doing the lectures.
I've just got one little note in my mind that will probably be a long story.
Do you hope, when people come to your work, do you want them to look at it as a corpus?
Is everything in your mind related one to the other?
Yes, I do.
Of course, that's an ambitious expectation.
But for me,
Everything that every writer writes, it's really all one book.
You're constantly growing in yourself and your society and your life is changing and there's a tension between these two things that produces the work.
But if you look at most writers, they return to the same themes in a different way with a different set of characters.
And I can see that in my own work.
You think you've written all you know about this or that, these people, in a certain situation.
And then afterwards, it's as if you walked around and saw it from the other side.
I read a quotation from you in another interview where you said you write to make sense of your own life.
I love that quote.
It's true, I think.
I understand that.
It's a continual process, then, with all of these books that you've written, to explore further for yourself.
I was brought up without any religion.
What is religion, really?
It's an explanation, isn't it?
on the purpose in life while we are here, and even what would happen to us afterwards.
But I was brought up with outset.
So it may be that when I first began to write, I was looking for a meaning in the structure, because it was not a ready-made one.
Well, have you found a purpose?
Have you found the answer to your purpose?
I suppose writing is my answer.
I'm still in the process of discovery.
And writing is something, I'm sure, that you expect to do... Oh, yes, as long as I live and don't turn gaga.
And you never get bored with it, I assume.
I don't think... Because, you know, writing is so much self-discipline, isn't it?
Nobody tells you you've got to.
And they'll even understand if you say, I'm going to take a day off.
Yes, but why doesn't one?
And I don't know why.
You seem to be your own boss in a very strict way.
I really am not myself if I'm a long time without life.
Now, is this more or less... I could take a brief holiday.
But, I mean, is this... I mean, Trollope could never pass a day without working.
I mean, the man was... No, I can pass a day.
You know, if I'm doing something else, it must be a kind of... John Kenneth Galbraith is that way here in Cambridge, too.
I mean, the man is... Well, at home, when I'm working, I work every day.
Saturdays, Sundays, it's all the same to me.
Any favourites among the books, or are you always...
most pleased with the one?
No, not always.
You know, there is some, I don't necessarily know whether they're the better books or the best books, but did you have for all sorts of private reasons more of a feeling for?
An old book of mine called The Guest of Honor is a book that I have a strong feeling for.
Then there is
The Conservationist, which was technically a challenge, which I think I managed to bring off, and it's my most lyrical book.
I've got a feeling for that.
And Berger's Daughter.
Of course, that book was banned in your country for many years.
That book was banned.
That was banned only for about six months, but two previous ones, one was banned for ten and one for twelve years.
such history now according that it happened.
Amazing.
And to look at the books now, can you understand why they were banned?
Well, you have to look at the crazy laws of the time, then you can understand.
And to go back to the events of this year, did you expect to see anything like this in your lifetime?
Well, in the last couple of years, one could believe it was going to happen, you know, while the negotiations were going on.
Once de Klerk and Mandela sat down together.
But then there were so many itches on the way.
Negotiations broke and started again and broke again and started again.
But what we feared was violence over the elections.
And of course the elections were unbelievable.
There was such an atmosphere of peace.
I think my hour is about up.